docs: #969 Document steps to recover from in-use key/key version deletion (#2349)
kroxylicious/kroxylicious: docs/modules/record-encryption/con-lost-kek.adoc

// file included in the following:
//
// assemblies/assembly-operations-record-encryption-filter.adoc

[id='con-lost-kek-{context}']
= Dealing with a lost KEK

This section discusses what to do if KEK that is still in use to encrypt topics is KEK is lost.

WARNING: It is stressed that for successful use of the Record Encryption filter that the encryption keys are *never* deleted from the KMS.
These procedures are provided for emergency use only.

If a KEK is lost, all the records that were encrypted by the KEK will be *unrecoverable*.
This means that consumers will be unable to read for the encrypted topic.  Business processing will stop.

If this happens, consumers attached to the topic will receive an error response from the consumer.
The precise details of the failure will vary depending on the Kafka Client library being used by the application.
The error message may look like this:

> * `Unexpected error code 91 while fetching at offset n from topic-partition <topic>-<partition>` (Apache Kafka client).

Author: Fixed by #2359

// file included in the following:
//
// assemblies/assembly-operations-record-encryption-filter.adoc

[id='con-lost-kek-{context}']

> = Dealing with a lost KEK

Reviewer: Recovering might be a bit optimistic. In some cases it's definitely more like "Coping".

> This section discusses what to do if KEK that is still in use to encrypt topics is KEK is lost.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section discusses what to do if you lose a KEK that is still required to decrypt records.
```

> This section discusses what to do if KEK that is still in use to encrypt topics is KEK is lost.

Reviewer 2: should we define 'lost', with an example, like 'deleted from the KMS'. It's the first time the term has showed up. To clarify it's about the external KMS.

> WARNING: It is stressed that for successful use of the Record Encryption filter that the encryption keys are *never* deleted from the KMS.
> These procedures are provided for emergency use only.

Reviewer: This is not really correct. It's fine to delete a KEK if there are no remaining records whose DEKs were encrypted with that KEK. The real problem is that, given Kafka retention semantics, that's hard to figure out, and the answer can indeed be "never", but it isn't always.

```suggestion
WARNING: Deleting KEKs from the KMS is not recommended. 
Figuring out which KEKs are no longer used by any records in a Kafka cluster is non-trivial.
Any remaining records encrypted using a deleted KEK will become *unrecoverable*. 
In addition, consumers will be unable to read beyond those unrecoverable records without specific intervention, meaning business processing will stop.
We recommend never deleting KEKs. As such, this procedure is provided for emergency use only.
```

If a KEK is lost, all the records that were encrypted by the KEK will be *unrecoverable*.

> This means that consumers will be unable to read for the encrypted topic.  Business processing will stop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that consumers will be unable to read from the encrypted topic.  Business processing will stop.
```

After the KEK has been recovered from backup and restored to the KMS, restart the proxy instances.
Applications should begin consuming again as normal.

== Recover the key from backup

If you have a backup of the keys in your KMS, you will be able to recover the key from the backup.

The precise details of how to do this will depend on which KMS you use.
Refer to documentation of the KMS for more details.

After the KEK has been recovered from backup and restored to the KMS, restart the proxy instances.
Applications should begin consuming again as normal.

NOTE: When restoring the key to your KMS, it is important to restore the key material and its associated metadata such as its
identifiers. The Record Encryption filter stores references to the key identifier in the cipher text record. Restoring the key material alone is not sufficient.

== Delete the records encrypted by the lost KEK or advance the consumer groups past them

The final two options are:

* delete the records encrypted with the lost KEK from Kafka, or
* advance the consumer group offsets used by your applications so that they skip the records that can't be decrypted.

> The first challenge is to identify the offsets in the topics after which use of the deleted KEK has ceased.

Reviewer: I agree we have room to improve the operational concerns around this in the future. As well as the idea above I can also imagine a tool which safely orchestrated things so that KEKs could be deleted:

1. Consume all topics in a cluster, finding those which have encrypted records, and the last offset of each KEK in each partition. This could run continuously as a client application, or be emitted as a topic by the filter.
2. Have the filter consume some set of prohibited KEKs, which would not be used for encrypting new records even if the policy said so. This fences KEKs off from being accidentally used.
3. When the smallest offset in all partitions is less than we recorded for a KEK in step 1 we know the KEK is no longer used by any record in the cluster, so it's safe to delete from the KMS.

> If you scale the proxy to more than one replica, the replicas won't necessarily response to a key rotation at the same moment.

Reviewer: The term replica will make sense for someone using the filter in kube, but on bare metal I don't think replica is typically used to refer to a multi-instance deployment.

> If you scale the proxy to more than one replica, the replicas won't necessarily response to a key rotation at the same moment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you scale the proxy to more than one replica, the replicas won't necessarily respond to a key rotation at the same moment.
```
